TAHMID: One of the sections I am writing currently is called ‘The diversity of need’ where I talk about different speech, language, and communication needs (SLCN) and how current technology aids communication, especially in school environments and the context of child development (questioning larger topics about inclusion simultaneously). I understand Amos has been diagnosed for severe speech sound disorder, and it would be much appreciated if you could provide an account of how he is being supported for SLCN (i.e., any technologies, therapy, etc.) both at home and at school.

EMMA: Amos has indeed been diagnosed with a severe speech sound disorder on top of his having Down’s Syndrome. He currently benefits from weekly (private) speech therapy and in the past has used an AAC (Augmentative and alternative communication) device. We find that technology can be a brilliant aid for Amos’ learning and development, but that often the people around him are not trained in supporting his use of it. He can use technology very capably and it’s one area where he can almost be on a level playing field with his peers.

TAHMID: If you could summarise which AAC systems Amos has used and a quick sentence or two about how he has progressed with them, or how effective they’ve been, that would be perfect. I’m arguing that once brain-computer interface technology evolves (and I’ll discuss how it’ll need to in the study), that it can provide perhaps a more intuitive medium of communication.

EMMA: Amos has used an AAC app called TouchChatHWP on his iPad. Amos’ speech is very delayed. Up until now we have used Makaton signing to support his communication, but as he is now 9 and the language we need to use on a daily basis is more complex, the signing isn’t quite as helpful as it was when he was younger and his needs, wants and emotions were less complex. We have stalled with our use of the TouchChat app - it took a lot of setting up and training for the speech therapist and teaching assistant involved. There have been a lot of changes at his mainstream primary school - a new head, new SENCO, new teacher and new TA - and they have not had training to use the App, so it isn’t being used at the moment. We are finding the lack of continuity and having to train new staff members every year in everything is a real hurdle for Amos being successful in his mainstream setting. We are also finding that Amos’ class teacher does not want him attached to his iPad during the day - she sees it as a ’treat’ for him to use, and finds it hard to manage his use of it in class as he has games on the iPad and sometimes when he’s finding school difficult, he’d prefer to play games on his device. So it would be better to have the iPad just as a communication device, or have a separate device. Finally, Amos doesn’t always have his iPad with him at times when he wants to communicate so again, a separate smaller device that is solely for ACC would be useful. But it would rely on him always having it on his person and that just isn’t always practical (e.g. when he’s playing football or at bedtime). I’ll drop you a line if anything else comes to mind, but I think those are the main reasons why we haven’t been enormously successful with using the TouchChat app. Amos would certainly benefit from using an ACC app more - we are seeing him get more and more frustrated as he is understood less by his peers and the gap between them is widening. He’s a child who has so much to say and it’s heartbreaking to see him being so little understood and particularly to see people underestimate him and baby him. 
